Translations chapter for the guide (#63)
r-devel/rdevguide: 08-translations.Rmd

this domain separate is that it is only relevant to one platform (Windows). In particular, Windows has historically
different character encodings, so that it made more sense for Windows developers to produce translations
for Windows, since it is non-trivial for non-Windows users to test their translations for the Windows GUI.

#### Generating .pot files

For outside contributors, there's no need to update .pot files -- translators will typically take the R .pot files
as given and generate .po files. These will be sent along to a language-specific translation maintainer, who then
compiles them to send to the R Core developer responsible for translations, who finally applies them as a patch.

To emphasize, this section is almost always not needed for contributing translations -- it is here for
completeness and edification.

### .po files

.po files are the most important artifacts for translators. They provide the (human-readable!) mapping between
the messages as they appear in the source code and how the messages will appear to users in translated locales.

#### Singular messages

> Most messages appear as `msgid`/`msgstr` pairs. The former gives the message at it appears in the code, while the
> latter shows how it should appear in translation. For example, here is an error in German (locale: `de`) informing
> the user that their input must be of class `POSIXt`
> ([.po file source](https://github.com/r-devel/r-svn/blob/c715d61cb74b3fee2d035faed9b258e86e420b75/src/library/base/po/R-de.po#L537-L538)):
> 
> ```
> msgid "'to' must be a \"POSIXt\" object"
> msgstr "'to' muss ein \"POSIXt\" Objekt sein"
> ```
> 
> The same message can also be found in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most messages appear as `msgid`/`msgstr` pairs. The former gives the message as it appears in the code, while the
latter shows how it should appear in translation. For example, here is an error in German (locale: `de`) informing
the user that their input must be of class `POSIXt`

    msgid "'to' must be a \"POSIXt\" object"
    msgstr "'to' muss ein \"POSIXt\" Objekt sein"

See this in context in the [`R-de.po` source file](https://github.com/r-devel/r-svn/blob/c715d61cb74b3fee2d035faed9b258e86e420b75/src/library/base/po/R-de.po#L537-L538).

The same message can also be found in
```

# Translations

This chapter covers internationalization in R, i.e., the display of messages in languages other than English. All
output in R (such as messages emitted by `stop()`, `warning()`, or `message()`) is eligible for translation, as
are menu labels in the GUI. Depending on the version of R that you are using, some of the languages might already
be available while others may need work. R leverages the [`gettext`](https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/) program
to handle the conversion from English to arbitrary target languages.

Having messages available in other languages can be an important bridge for R learners not confident in English --
rather than learning two things at once (coding in R and processing diagnostic information in English), they can
focus on coding while getting more natural errors/warnings in their native tongue.

The [`gettext` manual](https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/index.html) is a more canonical reference for

> deep understanding of how `gettext` works. This chapter will just give a broad overview, with particular focus on

Author: done, thanks!

how things work for R, with the goal of making it as low-friction as possible for developers and users to contribute
new/updated translations.

## How translations work

Each of the default packages distributed with R (i.e., those found in `./src/library` such as `base`, `utils`,

> and `stats`) contains a `po` directory that is the central location for cataloguing/translating each package's

Reviewer 2: I would suggest to also indicate that these packages have priority base, i.e.,

and `stats`) -> and `stats` and which have priority base)

> messages.

Reviewer 2: It might be good to add here what the `po` directory contains before continuing discussing different file formats.

### .pot files

The `.pot` file is a snapshot of the messages available in a given **domain**. A domain in R typically identifies
a source package and a source language (either R or C/C++). For example, the file `R-base.pot`

> (found in the R sources in `./src/library/base/po`) is a catalogue of all messages produced by R code in the

Author: Should we prefer a link to the svn trunk, or the GH mirror trunk? Former is more official of course, latter comes with syntax highlighting/other tooling integration, web-navigable history/blame, etc...

> (found in the R sources in `./src/library/base/po`) is a catalogue of all messages produced by R code in the

Reviewer: Yes, my first thought was that we should link to the official sources, but I like your later use of linking to highlighted lines and in general the GH mirror is easier to browse.

So, perhaps we can go with linking to the GH mirror whenever we just expect people to read the files in the browser (as throughout this chapter). To be very clear about it, we could add a footnote to the first link, to say that we are linking to the GH mirror in this chapter as it is a better interface for browsing the source files and link to the actual svn repo there (https://svn.r-project.org/R/trunk/)

> (found in the R sources in `./src/library/stats/po`) is a catalogue of all messages produced by R code in the

Reviewer 2: This might be easier to follow by first stating that stats/po contains to pot files and then explaining which ones they are and what they contain / are here for.

`base` package, while `stats.pot` (_viz._, `./src/library/stats/po`) is a catalogue of all messages produced

> by C code in the `stats` package.

Author: Great idea, much improved, thanks

> There are two exceptions to the basic pattern described above. The first is the domain for messages produced by

Reviewer 2: Do these exceptions all refer to files contained in the po directory of the base package?

the C code which is the fundamental backing of R itself (especially, but not exclusively, the C code under
./src/main). The associated .pot file is R.pot and it is found in `./src/library/base/po`. R-base.pot is a

> normal .pot file because base has a normal `R` directory.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean package `base`?

is the fundamental backing of R itself (especially, but not exclusively, the C code under `./src/main`).

> Given this idiosyncrasy, the associated `.pot` file is `R.pot` and it is found in the `po` directory for `base`.

Author: Agree it's a bit tough to convey what I want to here without getting too far into the weeds about how R is organized as a codebase. Your suggestion is progress -- I've tweaked a bit further, PTAL.

available for running R on Windows. These messages are stored in the `RGui.pot` domain, also in the `po`
directory for `base`, and are most commonly derived from C code found in `./src/gnuwin32`. One reason to keep
this domain separate is that it is only relevant to one platform (Windows). In particular, Windows has historically
different character encodings, so that it made more sense for Windows developers to produce translations

> for Windows, since it is non-trivial for non-Windows users to test their translations for the Windows GUI.

Reviewer 2: for Windows -> specifically for Windows

#### Generating .pot files

> For outside contributors, there's no need to update .pot files -- translators will typically take the R .pot files

Reviewer 2: Do you want to consisently use mark-up for .pot and .po files? I.e., `.pot` and `.po`.

For outside contributors, there's no need to update .pot files -- translators will typically take the R .pot files

> as given and generate .po files from them to be sent to an R-core maintainer as a patch.

Author: I had Michael Lawrence in mind here. But you're right that a more typical flow may be:

translators --> language-specific maintainer --> Michael L.

Is that worth clarifying here? Neither translators nor language maintainers need to worry about generating .pot...

To emphasize, this section is almost always not needed for contributing translations -- it is here for
completeness and edification.

### .po files

.po files are the most important artifacts for translators. They provide the (human-readable!) mapping between
the messages as they appear in the source code and how the messages will appear to users in translated locales.

#### Singular messages

Most messages appear as `msgid`/`msgstr` pairs. The former gives the message at it appears in the code, while the
latter shows how it should appear in translation. For example, here is an error in German (locale: `de`) informing
the user that their input must be of class `POSIXt`

> ([source](https://github.com/r-devel/r-svn/blob/c715d61cb74b3fee2d035faed9b258e86e420b75/src/library/base/po/R-de.po#L537-L538)):

Author: Not 100% sure I follow how you see things here; I changed 'source' in the link to '.po file source', does that help?

> ([source](https://github.com/r-devel/r-svn/blob/c715d61cb74b3fee2d035faed9b258e86e420b75/src/library/base/po/R-de.po#L537-L538)):

Reviewer: I've made a suggestion now to show what I meant - I removed the bit about the GH mirror following our discussion above.

> ([source](https://github.com/r-devel/r-svn/blob/c715d61cb74b3fee2d035faed9b258e86e420b75/src/library/base/po/R-de.po#L537-L538)):

Author: got it, thanks!

msgid "'to' must be a \"POSIXt\" object"
msgstr "'to' muss ein \"POSIXt\" Objekt sein"
```

> See this in context in the [`R-de.po` source file](https://github.com/r-devel/r-svn/blob/c715d61cb74b3fee2d035faed9b258e86e420b75/src/library/base/po/R-de.po#L537-L538).

Reviewer 2: Why are you not linking to the SVN, i.e.,

https://svn.r-project.org/R/trunk/src/library/base/po/R-de.po

Chinese typically does not alter the word itself in similar situations (一只狗, 两只狗, 一百只狗, 零只狗); Arabic has _six_
different ways to pluralize a quantity.

In .po files, this shows up in the form of `msgid_plural` entries, followed by several ordered `msgstr` entries. Here's an example from
[`R-de.po`](https://github.com/r-devel/r-svn/blob/c715d61cb74b3fee2d035faed9b258e86e420b75/src/library/base/po/R-de.po#L2015-L2018):

```
msgid "Warning message:\n"
msgid_plural "Warning messages:\n"
msgstr[0] "Warnmeldung:\n"
msgstr[1] "Warnmeldungen:\n"
```

The two entries in English correspond to the singular and plural messages; the two entries in German correspond similarly, because
pluralization rules in German are similar to those in English. The situation in Lithuanian
([`R-lt.po`](https://github.com/r-devel/r-svn/blob/c715d61cb74b3fee2d035faed9b258e86e420b75/src/library/base/po/R-lt.po#L1999-L2003))
is more divergent:

```
msgid "Warning message:\n"
msgid_plural "Warning messages:\n"
msgstr[0] "Įspėjantis pranešimas:\n"
msgstr[1] "Įspėjantys pranešimai:\n"
msgstr[2] "Įspėjančių pranešimų:\n"
```

> This corresponds to the 3 different ways to pluralize words in Polish.

Reviewer 2: Lithuanian?

"%100<10 || n%100>=20) ? 1 : 2);\n"
```

`nplurals` tells us how many entries correspond to each `msgid_plural` for this language. `plural` tells us, for the
quantity `n`, which entry to use. The arithmetic is C code; most important if you really want to parse this and are only
familiar with R code is C's [ternary operator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%3F:): `test ? valueIfTrue : valueIfFalse`
is a handy way to write R's `if (test) valueIfTrue else valueIfFalse`.

Parsing, we get the following associations:

 - the `0` entry corresponds to when a number equals 1 modulo 10 (i.e., 1, 11, 21, 31, ...) _except_ numbers equaling
   11 modulo 100 (i.e., 11, 111, 211, 311, ...). Combining, that's 1, 21, 31, ..., 91, 101, 121, 131, ..., 191, ...
 - the `1` entry corresponds to numbers at least 2 modulo 10 (2, 3, ..., 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, ...) and _either_
   below 10 modulo 100 (0, 1, ..., 9, 100, 101, ..., 109, ...) _or_ exceeding 20 modulo 100 (21, 22, ..., 99). Combining,
   that's 2, 3, ..., 9, 22, 23, ..., 29, 32, 33, ... 39, ..., 102, 103, ..., 109, 122, 123, ...
 - The `2` entry corresponds to all other numbers, i.e. 0, 10, 11, 12, ..., 19, 20, 30, ..., 90, 100, 110, 111, 112, ...

> TODO(michaelchirico): How to discover a new `nplurals/plural`.

Reviewer: Can we put these TODOS in HTML comments?

Author: Yep, done. I left them as visible TODOs with the intention of finishing them before merging, but if we've passed MVP we can just hide them for now.

TODO(michaelchirico): sprintf templates (`%s`) and redirections (`%1$s`)
TODO(michaelchirico): fuzzy translations

### .mo files

.po files are plain text, but while helpful for human readers, this is inefficient for consumption by computers.
The .mo format is a "compiled" version of the .po file optimized for retrieving messages when R is running.

> In R-devel, the conversion from .po to .mo is done by R-core -- you don't need to compile these files yourself.

Reviewer: R-core -> R Core
